---
layout: post
title: "Reflection: Mapping Multisequence Text Structures"
number: "12"
tags:
---

Mapping text structure can be done by both the reader and writer of documents.[^computational_methods] Establishing links between documents or attaching metadata to documents (assigning categories) results in multisequential text structures, or "interconnective structure\[s]" (Nelson 1987). There may be an intended paragraph-by-paragraph sequence of a text — the structure conventionally conceived as the main text — but several other structures can be mapped. For example, the order of chapters and subchapters is the sequential order intended by the writer. However, within that sequential order, there can be reused content items from other sources or other categories of information (conventionally embedded and visually distinguished from the main text) that point to internal or external content items. Mapping text structure thus entails assigning the contents of documents resulting in an order that is multisequential.

[^computational_methods]: As noted in [entry 03](03), computational methods, such as applying natural language processing techniques for classifying text and keyword extraction, are not excluded.

> It should be noted, furthermore, that while a novel on paper is far from being automatically linear, a hypertext is not necessarily nonlinear. The pages or segments may be rigorously sequential, forcing the reader to read them in a fixed order, one even more fixed than that of the pages of a book, because it is always possible to open a book to any page one wishes while a hypertext can be programmed to totally control the reader's path. This said, hypertext by nature lends itself ideally to a variety of reading paths and to multisequential navigation. (Vandendorpe 2009)

The design of the construct should facilitate mapping text structures multisequentially and the choice of showing/hiding particular paths, including the fixed sequence set by a writer. To that end, a third link type called *sequence links* needs to be developed.[^sequence_link]

[^sequence_link]: *Sequence links* are introduced in [entry 14](14).

## Sources

Vandendorpe C. From papyrus to hypertext: toward the universal digital library. Urbana: University of Illinois Press; 2009.
