---
layout: post
title: Introducing the Project and Detailing the Method
number: "01"
tags: [Research_Proposal]
---

This is the first of a series of weblog entries that function as snapshots of the research process. This entry in particular serves the purpose of introducing the topic of research, the research plan, and the scope of the project.

1. Title
2. Question
3. Hypothesis
4. Method
5. Documentation
6. Evaluation

## 1. Title

~~Tinkering with Textual Structures: A Digital Construct~~

~~A Digital Construct for Tinkering With Text Structure~~

A Construct for Tinkering With Digital Text

## 2. Question

What may result from undermining the biases and conventions inherited from paper text when creating a construct for digital text, based on the premise that all texts are interconnected?

## 3. Hypothesis

The implication of interconnection is that every text has multiple potential structures, which a construct in the digital realm can be created to reflect. To that end, the construct must support activities for mapping, visualizing, and accessing different structures.

Paper text has always been confined by the media object used, be it a book, folder, pamphlet, or journal. Thus, conventions developed for mapping and visualizing interconnection entailed embedding different categories of information in the form of such concepts as footnotes and marginal annotations. Instead of embedding connections, a construct in the digital realm can represent such connections in ways that are not feasible with paper text. With that as a point of departure, this project entails creating a construct for digital text with the aim of re-imagining how interconnection can be represented. Mapping and visualizing interconnection within and between texts results in complex layers of information. These complex layers of information are conceptualized and visually implemented as components in a three-dimensional space that can be made visible or hidden through deliberate action. In the three-dimensional space, it is possible to access both the hierarchical and non-hierarchical structures of the main text that have been mapped. By accessing the hierarchical structure—comprising content objects such as a title, subtitles, and paragraphs, without any other types of content objects visible—people can obtain the main points in a conventional manner (e.g. introduction, main body, and conclusion). People may tinker with that structure by making other content objects visible. In effect, people switch between perspectives on the main text, which shapes their understanding. In re-imagining how interconnection can be mapped, visualized, and accessed within and across texts, the final version of the construct enables a tinkering approach to engaging with text.

## 4. Method

The purpose of the construct is to aid thinking with text by supporting activities for mapping, visualizing, and accessing different structures. Within the bounds of feasibility, this project entails writing a text on the topic of interconnection, which is mapped and visualized in the construct. The end result will allow people to access what has been mapped. The following is a tentative outline of the process.

### Step 1: Conceptualize the construct

This is the blueprint step. It entails creating sketches of the components that make up the construct, including explanations of how those components interact. For example, sets of linked content objects (e.g. a paragraph, a phrase within a paragraph, a subtitle, a list item, a note on a list, etc.) can be grouped to form a single entity. Each entity — that is, a set of content objects — can be linked to other entities. The visualization and functionality of these components are tested in step 3.

### Step 2: Write the main text that is to be implemented in the construct

The main text introduces and defines the term interconnection, explaining the philosophical position it holds and providing historical examples of media shaped to represent how subjects are connected on multiple levels. Through these examples, the biases and conventions inherited from paper text are examined, including a discussion on the (dis)advantages. Tied in to that discussion is the potential for re-imagining how interconnection can be represented in the digital realm. In this sense, it results in a self-reflexive project. Throughout the process of writing the main text, small problems are expected to emerge. In response to these problems, interactive visual tests serving as potential solutions are created in the following step.

### Step 3: Create interactive visual tests of the construct

One such problem to solve could be how the interaction works, for example, how to switch from one perspective to another in such a way that the interaction supports an understanding that each perspective represents an alternate structure of the same text (albeit, different versions). Another hypothetical problem could be how different categories of information are distinguished. If, for example, footnotes as traditionally implemented in paper text are abandoned, then how are these categories of information dealt with in the construct? And even further, how are different types of footnotes distinguished (e.g. a reference from a tangent, from an example, from a definition of a term)? The interactive visual tests created in this step are expected to lead to modifications of the construct on a conceptual level. As each informs the other, steps 2-3 are iterated until it is surmised that enough has been gathered for step 4.

### Step 4: Full implementation of the construct

This step involves completing the main text and the design of the construct by making improvements based on what has been gathered in the previous steps.

## 5. Documentation

For each iteration of steps 2-3, the resulting interactive visual tests are documented and published on this weblog. Each entry contains the current version of the main text and the construct (i.e. the interactive visual tests described in step 3). A written reflection is included, serving to inform modifications for improvement. The final version of the construct (which includes the final version of the main text) is to be developed in Unity and published online. To that end, there are two workflows. The workflow for publishing the construct entails (1) exporting the project from Unity, which is (2) uploaded on Github for continuous deployment, then (3) pinned on IPFS via Fleek, and (4) accessed via a website URL. Hence the process of creating the construct is documented and publicly accessible. The workflow for writing the texts is designed so that a single editorial file can be converted to various formats. Thus, the texts intended for the weblog entries and the main text intended for the construct are all written in an extended version of the Markdown format, which can be exported into various output formats (e.g. HTML, TXT, XML) using digital tools.

## 6. Evaluation

Both the documentation of the process and the final version of the construct inform the evaluation. The documentation of the process comprises written reflections of significant steps, and the final version of the construct serves as a demonstration of how digital representation of interconnection can be re-imagined. In order for the construct to hold the main argument, the following points must be reflected:

- Does the construct enable tinkering with the hierarchical presentation of the main text?
- Does accessing those different structures reflect switching between perspectives on the main text?
- ~~Are there potential advantages to how switching between perspectives is implemented?~~

The evaluation thus contends whether or not the construct demonstrates the above points. Functioning as a preliminary list, additions and modifications are expected throughout the process.
